There are over 18 million known substances in our world. We will begin by assuming that all materials are made from elements, materials which cannot be decomposed into simpler substances. We will assume that we have identified all of these elements, and that there are a very small number of them. All other pure substances, which we call compounds, are made up from these elements and can be decomposed into these elements. For example, metallic iron and gaseous oxygen are both elements and cannot be reduced into simpler substances, but iron rust, or ferrous oxide, is a compound which can be reduced to elemental iron and oxygen. The elements are not transmutable: one element cannot be converted into another. Finally, we all assume that we have demonstrated the Law of Conservation of Mass.

Law of Conservation of Mass

The total mass of all products of a chemical reaction is equal to the total mass of all reactants of that reaction.

These statements are summaries of many observations, which required a tremendous amount of experimentation to achieve and even more creating thinking to systematize as we have written them here. By making these assumptions, we can proceed directly with the experiments which led to the development of the atomic-molecular theory.

Goals
The statements above, though correct, are actually more vague than they might first appear. For example, exactly what do we mean when we say that all materials are made from elements? Why is it that the elements cannot be decomposed? What does it mean to combine elements into a compound? We want to understand more about the nature of elements and compounds so we can describe the processes by which elements combine to form compounds, by which compounds are decomposed into elements, and by which compounds are converted from one to another during chemical reactions.

One possibility for answering these questions is to assume that a compound is formed when indestructible elements are simply mixed together, as for example, if we imagine stirring together a mixture of sugar and sand. Neither the sand nor the sugar is decomposed in the process. And the mixture can be decomposed back into the original components. In this case, though, the resultant mixture exhibits the properties of both components: for example, the mixture would taste sweet, owing to the sugar component, but gritty, characteristic of the sand component.

In contrast, the compound we call iron rust bears little resemblance to elemental iron: iron rust does not exhibit elemental iron's color, density, hardness, magnetism, etc. Since the properties of the elements are not maintained by the compound, then the compound must not be a simple mixture of the elements.

We could, of course, jump directly to the answers to these questions by stating that the elements themselves are comprised of atoms: indivisible, identical particles distinctive of that element. Then a compound is formed by combining the atoms of the composite elements. Certainly, the Law of Conservation of Mass would be easily explained by the existence of immutable atoms of fixed mass.

However, if we do decide to jump to conclusions and assume the existence of atoms without further evidence (as did the leading chemists of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries), it does not lead us anywhere. What happens to iron when, after prolonged heating in air, it converts to iron rust? Why is it that the resultant combination of iron and air does not maintain the properties of either, as we would expect if the atoms of each are mixed together? An atomic view of nature would not yet provide any understanding of how the air and the iron have interacted or combined to form the new compound, and we can't make any predictions about how much iron will produce how much iron rust. There is no basis for making any statements about the properties of these atoms. We need further observations.

Observation 1: Mass relationships during chemical reactions
The Law of Conservation of Mass, by itself alone, does not require an atomic view of the elements. Mass could be conserved even if matter were not atomic. The importance of the Law of Conservation of Mass is that it reveals that we can usefully measure the masses of the elements which are contained in a fixed mass of a compound. As an example, we can decompose copper carbonate into its constituent elements, copper, oxygen, and carbon, weighing each and taking the ratios of these masses. The result is that every sample of copper carbonate is  51.5%  copper,  38.8%  oxygen, and  9.7%  carbon. Stated differently, the masses of copper, oxygen, and carbon are in the ratio of 5.3 :4 :1, for every measurement of every sample of copper carbonate. Similarly, lead sulfide is  86.7%  lead and  13.3%  sulfur, so that the mass ratio for lead to sulfur in lead sulfide is always 6.5:1. Every sample of copper carbonate and every sample of lead sulfide will produce these elemental proportions, regardless of how much material we decompose or where the material came from. These results are examples of a general principle known as the Law of Definite Proportions.

Law of Definite Proportions

When two or more elements combine to form a compound, their masses in that compound are in a fixed and definite ratio.

These data help justify an atomic view of matter. We can simply argue that, for example, lead sulfide is formed by taking one lead atom and combining it with one sulfur atom. If this were true, then we also must conclude that the ratio of the mass of a lead atom to that of a sulfur atom is the same as the 6.5:1 lead to sulfur mass ratio we found for the bulk lead sulfide. This atomic explanation looks like the definitive answer to the question of what it means to combine two elements to make a compound, and it should even permit prediction of what quantity of lead sulfide will be produced by a given amount of lead. For example,  6.5g  of lead will produce exactly  7.5g  of lead sulfide,  50g  of lead will produce  57.7g  of lead sulfide, etc.

There is a problem, however. We can illustrate with three compounds formed from hydrogen, oxygen, and nitrogen. The three mass proportion measurements are given in the following table. First we examine nitric oxide, to find that the mass proportion is 8:7 oxygen to nitrogen. If this is one nitrogen atom combined with one oxygen atom, we would expect that the mass of an oxygen atom is  8/7=1.14  times that of a nitrogen atom. Second we examine ammonia, which is a combination of nitrogen and hydrogen with the mass proportion of 7:1.5 nitrogen to hydrogen. If this is one nitrogen combined with one hydrogen, we would expect that a nitrogen atom mass is 4.67 times that of a hydrogen atom mass. These two expectations predict a relationship between the mass of an oxygen atom and the mass of a hydrogen atom. If the mass of an oxygen atom is 1.14 times the mass of a nitrogen atom and if the mass of a nitrogen atom is 4.67 times the mass of a hydrogen atom, then we must conclude that an oxygen atom has a mass which is  1.14×4.67=5.34  times that of a hydrogen atom.

But there is a problem with this calculation. The third line of the following table shows that the compound formed from hydrogen and oxygen is water, which is found to have mass proportion 8:1 oxygen to hydrogen. Our expectation should then be that an oxygen atom mass is 8.0 times a hydrogen atom mass. Thus the three measurements in the following table appear to lead to contradictory expectations of atomic mass ratios. How are we to reconcile these results?